---
layout : post
title: "Computing a galois group"
date: 2021-01-08
tag: Algebra
---
We will show that the extension $$L=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2},\sqrt{3})/\mathbb{Q}$$ is galois and compute its galois group. Finally we will show that
its galois group is isomorphic to $$\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}\times \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$$.

**Show it is indeed galois:** Since $$\sqrt{2},\sqrt{3}$$ are both algebraic over $$\mathbb{Q}$$ (since $$X^2-2$$ and $$X^2-3$$ are their minimal polynomials) we immediately get
that $$L/\mathbb{Q}$$ is finite, in particular it is algebraic. Since $$\mathbb{Q}$$ is a perfect field, $$L/\mathbb{Q}$$ is separable. The polynomial 
$$ f=(X^2-2)(X^2-3) \in \mathbb{Q}[X]$$
has the following roots: $$\pm \sqrt{2}, \pm\sqrt{3}$$. Therefore it splits into linear factors over $$L$$ and $$L$$ is generated by the zeros of $$f$$. Therefore $$L/\mathbb{Q}$$ is normal. In total we get that $$L/\mathbb{Q}$$ is a finite galois extension.    

**Computing the galois group:** We know that since $$L/\mathbb{Q}$$ is galois we have that $$\#\operatorname{Gal}(L/K)=[L:\mathbb{Q}]$$. We have that 
$$ [L:\mathbb{Q}]=[L:\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})]\cdot [\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2}):\mathbb{Q}]$$
the latter term evaluates to $$2$$. We will show that $$[L:\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})]=2$$. Because $$X^2-3\in \mathbb{Q}[X]\subset \mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})[X]$$ we have that $$[L:\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})]\le 2$$. Suppose it was $$1$$, then $$\sqrt{3}\in \mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})$$. Thus $$\exists a,b\in \mathbb{Q}$$ s.t. $$\sqrt{3}=a+b\sqrt{2}$$. Suppose $$a,b\neq 0$$, then we have that

$$3 = a^2 + 2ab\sqrt{2} +2b^2 \Rightarrow \frac{3-a^2-b^2}{2ab} = \sqrt{2}  $$

but the left term is in $$\mathbb{Q}$$ and the right term is not. A contradiction. Suppose $$b =0$$, then $$\sqrt{3}$$ would be rational, therefore $$b\neq 0$$. Now suppose $$a=0$$, then $$\sqrt{3}=b\sqrt{2}$$, which yields that 
$$ \frac{\sqrt{2}}{\sqrt{3}}=b\in \mathbb{Q}$$ there exist $$u,v\in \mathbb{Z}$$ coprime with $$b=u/v$$. Then 

$$ \frac{2}{3} = \frac{u^2}{v^2} \iff \frac{2}{3}- \frac{u^2}{v^2} = 0 \iff 2v^2 = 3u^2$$ 

this however can not be true because every prime factor of $$2v^2$$ except for two has even multiplicity but two can only occur an even number of times in the prime factorization of $$3u^2$$, leading to a contradiction. Therefore $$\sqrt{3}\notin \mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})$$ and we finally obtain 

$$[L:\mathbb{Q}]=[L:\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})]\cdot [\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2}):\mathbb{Q}]=4$$  

Since every element of $$\sigma\in\operatorname{Gal}(L/\mathbb{Q})$$ is uniquely defined by its values on $$\sqrt{2}$$ and $$\sqrt{3}$$ and we know that $$\sigma$$ permutes the roots of $$X^2-3$$ and $$X^2-2$$ we can explicitely list all elements of the galois group of $$L/\mathbb{Q}$$

* $$\sigma=\operatorname{id}_L$$ 
* $$\sigma(\sqrt{2}) = -\sqrt{2}$$ and $$\sigma(\sqrt{3}) = \sqrt{3}$$
* $$\sigma(\sqrt{2}) = \sqrt{2}$$ and $$\sigma(\sqrt{3}) = -\sqrt{3}$$
* $$\sigma(\sqrt{2}) = -\sqrt{2}$$ and $$\sigma(\sqrt{3}) = -\sqrt{3}$$

since every element of $$\operatorname{Gal}(L/\mathbb{Q})$$ except for the identity on $$L$$ does not fix $$\sqrt{2}+\sqrt{3}$$ we know by the fundamental theorem of galois theory that $$\sqrt{2}+\sqrt{3}$$ is a primitve element of $$L/\mathbb{Q}$$. 

We know want to show that $$\operatorname{Gal}(L/\mathbb{Q})\cong \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}\times \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$$. 