---
layout : post
title: "Example of a finite but not separable extension of fields."
date: 2021-01-10
tag: Algebra
---
Every finite extension is algebraic so we won't find any field extension of a perfect field with the above properties.
Since finite fields and fields of characteristic $$0$$ are perfect, we will take the easiest example of an infinite field that
has positive characteristic, namely $$\mathbb{F}_p(t)$$ the field of rational functions with coefficient sin $$\mahbb{F}_p$$. Let $$k=\mathbb{F}_p(t)$$. 

**Claim:** $$L=k[X]/(X^p-t)/k$$ is finite but not separable. 

The polynomial $$f=X^p-t\in k[X]$$ is irreducible. This is true because $$f$$ is a polynomial in $$\mathbb{F}_p[t]=k'$$ and $$Q(k')=k$$ i.e. the field of fractions of $$k'$$ is $$k$$. In $$k'$$ we know that $$t$$ is prime because $$k'/(t)=\mathbb{F}_p[t]/(t)\cong \mathbb{F}_p$$ and since the RHS is a field the ideal generated by $$t$$ is maximal therefore it is in particular prime. $$f$$ has a leading coefficient of one and is therefore primitive. Using Eisenstein's criterion we get that $$f$$ is irreducible over $$Q(k')[X]=k[X]$$. An irreducible polynomial is separable iff its formal derivative does not vanish but $$f'=pX^{p-1}=0$$ therefore $$f$$ is not separable. The degree of $$L/k$$ is $$p<\infty$$. In an algebraic closure of $$k$$, lets say $$\overline{k}$$ we find a root of $$f$$ e.g. $$\alpha\in \overline{k}$$. Then since $$f$$ is irreducible over $$k$$ we know $$f$$ is the minimal polynomial of $$\alpha$$ over $$k$$. Then 

$$ k(\alpha) \cong k[X]/(X^p-t) $$

and since the minimal polynomial of $$\alpha$$ is not separable we get that $$k(\alpha)/k$$ is not separable. Using the isomorphism above we get the desired result.   